This is David Crews Daryl Lane. Not all of it. I've read Conan the Conqueror, of
course, and I've read most of the other things, but I have read all of those
pastiches. I've read that Ace Eleven series, and I've read all of that. Have
read De Camp's? I've read some of them. That might be his best. Might be. I think
he's a much more of a shit person. Howard was? And his life is interesting. I
like the puzzles. We try and find out where he lost him. Yeah, yeah. Have you
read most of his stuff? I've read more of it than Charlotte has. I've read
things besides the Conan stuff. I've read some of the short stories. Well, you
know, 30, 40 pages. The first one I ever read was the Valley of the Worm. Yeah.
Didn't he think his westerns would be what he was remembered for, would be his
best.
Yeah.
We're going to catch the noise outside, but that's just life. Well, I could
close those blackout curtains if you think that would help. That might help a
little.
Daryl, speak to me for a second. Testing. One, two, three, four. Testing. That's
too close, isn't it? Right here. No, don't worry about it. It's on playback.
Yeah, but right here is where you want me to speak. You'll see the levels right
here. Go ahead, talk. Testing, one, two, three, four. Okay. Yeah. Yeah, I think
they cut down on the noise. This will be the first full length book on Howard
Wright, biography type. Yes, the last kelp is the only thing. Okay, hang on.
We're not going. And that wasn't really a. Bill talked to me for a second. Yeah.
Okay, how's that? All right. Or, de Camp has done non-falvarian in all those
changes. Louder or slower, closer? Would you mind? farther but it's only about
50 pages. Yea I'm not familiar with that one I guess. OK. One, two, three, four,
five, six. He did the all time That way he was the publisher. But this will be
the first full length. Unless you can't find it. Well I guess it would, ok.
As I said don't worry we edit this You ought to see after we do a show, tell
jokes and laugh and everything else. He edits them out. Okay. Am I coming
across? Definitely. Put my hair out there. Oh, sorry. I got it. There.
Okay, Daryl. Are we on right now? We're going. Oh, okay. We'd like to know
some things, Dr. Laughlin, about De Camp's forthcoming biography of Howard. for
instance how you became associated with de Camp and if you're helping with the
book and date of publication anything okay well I am helping very in a minor
capacity he came to Brownwood in 1978 to do research and I met him and I have
looked up several things for me at the Beard County courthouse about howards
insurance policy that was left to his mother about his car about what his estate
was I've looked up a lot of things of Brownwood High his grade report from
Howard Payne Business College. Just a few things like that is the way I've
helped him. What have you seen of the book so far? What kind of approach does he
seem to take? Is it a literary criticism or a biography? The idea for the book
actually came from a woman named Jane Griffin. She's dead now, but she was a
psychologist at the University of Pennsylvania, I believe, there in Philadelphia
in the area where they live. And she suggested, well actually they were talking
about the trouble they were having over Conan Copyright, and they were
mentioning the Karkandall women, and not that they were giving them problems,
but they just mentioned the name, and this Jane Griffin who was a friend of
theirs said, well, I know some Karkandalls, and she said, really? Where are they
from? I said, Ranger, Texas, and they just came and glued and said, these are
our ladies. What do you know about them? And she said she'd gone to high school
with the girl, with the daughter of Doctor Kirkendall and so Jane suggested that
they write a psycho biography. So, that is the approach. It's very heavy
psychological. The second chapter I believe is titled Dark Valley Lord and this
is about his father's influence in the young boy's life and how he could have
been a symbol of the Dark Valley Lord, which would might account for some of the
very emotional stormy relationship he had with his father. In other words, the
attempt
will be to explain maybe why he wrote the kind of fiction he did because of the
the upbringing and the life that he had. Actually, the approach that Jane
Griffin had in mind was to explain why he committed suicide when he did. She was
interested in it from a psychologist point of view. And De Camp's were more
interested in it from a literary point of view. What does his psychology tell us
about what he wrote? So they use psychology that way. And then Jane Griffin died
several months ago, and she'd only done the first six chapters with them. So the
last half is going to be done totally without her input, even though she'd done
a lot of research and work on it and commentary for them. So I think it's going
to be a little less of a psycho biography than it started out to be. I'm picking
up some Ps. Okay, we all got them. is De Camp comfortable with that approach to
Howard? I remember once in one of his earlier articles about Howard he said that
it wasn't up to him to psychoanalyze and far be it from him to explain Howard's
work or to look at his life. Getting involved with a book like this now is
that... I really feel that he's fairly comfortable with it if you've read
Lovecraft's biography by De Camp he uses a lot of psychology in that too. In
fact, many of the fans were infuriated. I thought it was a little bit heavy
-handed on the psychology. In the literary swordsman and sorcerers in which he
has a chapter on Howard, he uses the word schizoid and to describe him, and he
goes to great length to explain that this is not the same meaning as
schizophrenic, but that word has offended people like Lindsey Tyson and Tevis
Clyde Smith. He's calling him crazy. So I think, really, de Camp is more
inclined towards psychological criticism than that comment you read would
indicate.
Do you think that Howard had serious psychological problems or the kinds of...?
I don't think there's any doubt that he did. Is it as simple as a domineering
father and a possessive mother? Well, I don't know if it would be that simple or
not, but certainly those were contributing problems. The father was not really
so domineering. He was as possessive as the mother was, really. Everyone blames
her, but he was terribly upset when a girl would come by to see Robert and say,
oh, Mama, does this mean we're going to lose our boy? No, and she'd say, we're
not going to lose our boy. She was more confident. And they had a very emotional
relationship with Howard and his father. They would have these stormy scenes and
then these very emotional reconciliations with each other. So there was
definitely family problems there of some sort. I don't guess any psychological
problems. It's simple. He was born a little bit late in life for a first child.
His mother was 35, 36, I think, when he was born. They had considered adopting a
child before he was born. and perhaps he was just a... I've seen a picture of
him when he was four years old with the long curls and you can just tell that he
was his mother's pride and joy. He was an only child? Yes.
I understand that he did, what, have suicidal thoughts or... All his life. Oh,
he did. At least as early as high school he was talking about suicide. Now,
Lindsay Tyson says that he never mentioned suicide to him, but Howard kept his
friendship with Tyson separate from his literary associations. He would go
hunting with Lindsey Tyson or they didn't actually shoot anything, they just
went trapping around with a gun in their hands. But that's why Lindsey Tyson did
not hesitate to loan him the gun that Howard shot himself with. Howard had his
own gun while he borrowed a friend's to shoot himself with, no one ever knew.
Yeah, I understood that it was the gun that he'd carry with
him in his car. It was in the glove compartment of his car but it was Lindsey
Tyson's gun. In fact, I said no one knew why he borrowed a friend's gun but
people have speculated that his father knew he was considering suicide because
he had said things to his father like, Are you going to go with us daddy? us
that he was going to go when the mother went. They knew she was in her terminal
illness and they speculate that perhaps Dr. Howard Howard had hidden his
handguns with the, you know, that's just speculation, but he did borrow it from
his friend, Lindsay Tyson. You might back up and explain who Lindsay Tyson is.
Okay, Lindsay Tyson is a resident of Cross Plains. He lives there today. He was
a close friend of Howard. They met in junior high, I believe. Howard came out
for basketball, and he was so domineering, I guess is the word. He didn't like
team play. He was not good at team sports. He just wanted to rush in there and
get the ball himself. And consequently, he had a little trouble with the coach
and the other players. So he felt like he had been rejected. He was an outcast.
And Lindsey Tyson was one of his friends, one of the few friends he had really
in junior high and high school. And they were close off through their adult
lives. In fact, Howard would not even walk on anyone else's property. And, you
know, out in the country, a small town, when you're walking in the town, you can
cross anybody's pasture or yard you want to. He wouldn't walk on anyone else's
property except Lindsay Tysons. He would walk across his farm, but no one
else's. They say sometimes he would walk miles out of his way to walk, you know,
to go by the road rather than to take a shortcut to cross somebody's pasture. I
had one more question about his mother. It seems to be the immediate impetus for
his suicide was his mother's pending death, I guess. Didn't the nurse tell him
that she wouldn't come out of the coma or something to that effect? Was that the
reason, or does this have a longer history? I mean, was it simply the last
straw? I think it's a longer history. I think he couldn't function in a world
without his devotion to his mother. He didn't have any purpose in life. Jane
Griffin, the psychologist, has speculated that because of the worry with his
mother's last illness that he couldn't write either, So he didn't have writing
as a release for his emotions. And all of his emotions have been released
through his writing or through his mother. And not having her, he just couldn't
function anymore. But it's a lifetime, 30 years of not functioning without your
mother. So that's a possibility. What does the inscription on the tombstone say?
They were beautiful in life and they're not separated in death. Something like
that is from Wordsworth. that Dr. Howard picked it out. He chose it. They're
beautiful together in life, and they're not separated in death. When did Dr.
Howard die his father? I want to say 1948, but that may be too late. It was in
the 40s. That was, what, over 20 years later, in fact, he lived on then, right?
That may be. No, no, he died, Howard, in 1936. Uh-huh. That may be sometime in
the 40s, I would have to check. Yeah, the psychology of Howard, of course, is
fascinating. I assume that's why this book is taking the approach it is. But,
Dr. Crider, I suppose any author would put himself into his work, whether he
wants to or not. You can't hardly help that. How much of Howard do you think
came out in his heroes? Conan or Rand MacMoran or any of them? I probably
shouldn't even speculate about that. But Howard, there are all the stories about
Howard walking down the street doing the shadow boxing and fencing, things like
that. And I would assume, probably incorrectly, but I would assume that there
was probably a lot of him in Conan and some of the other heroes. Which that was
a wish fulfillment. Right, he liked to think that there was a lot of him in
those heroes. But he would have been had he not been so psychologically
crippled. Well, didn't he actually believe, I'm not sure if he believed this or
not, but didn't he often write that sometimes when he was writing it was like he
was being possessed by heroes or forces or things from the past? Maybe live
these past lives, that he dreamed these past lives. I don't believe he ever said
he was possessed. He didn't use that word, but he said it was as though Conan
were standing at his shoulder there beside him.
And his philosophy of which story is it? Is it Beyond the Black River? Is that
the one where he talks about barbarism at the end? He talked about that quite a
bit. I'm not… I'm talking about how the barbarians will prevail. One tends to
get the feeling of that in a lot of his books. The specific statement of it is
in one story that I can't particularly remember. But I've often wondered whether
Howard believed that himself or not. and whether he liked to think that that was
true. I think that, again, it was a sort of explanation for why he did not fit
in with other people. He liked to believe, I am the last barbarian. It's because
in my tie, it will prevail. He liked to believe the other people had a veneer of
civilization on them that got them away from the basics that were really
important. And if you've read his correspondence with Lovecraft, They had long
arguments about the physical versus the intellectual needs of a society. And
Howard would say that in the tough country where he lived, you had to be
physically fit, and he spent a great deal of his life, his adult life trying to
be physically fit, boxing and working out and that sort of thing. But I think
it's more of an excuse that these other people have intellectualized or have
adopted some kind of pansy religion or something like that, and I'm not.
I'm one of the originals in my time who survived. What do you think about some
reasons why Howard wrote? I read contradictory things on this. For instance,
once he said, I do it for the money. If it wasn't for the money, I wouldn't
write. In other places, he said, well, as we've been saying just a few moments
ago, he seemed to have a need to write. What do you think of his actual motives?
Was he clear on them? Did he have a sense of himself as doing a useful job of
writing? Or was it just for the money? I don't see how he could have been for
the money, considering what he was paid for some of the things that he wrote,
especially when he first started out. He wasn't selling that much. Just some
poems and very short stories to weird tales. He didn't get much, but he
certainly didn't quit writing. He kept on. Pardon me. He also said when he was
nine years old, he told the postmistress, I want to say it was not Ranger
Crosscut, I believe, when he was nine years old, he told the postmistress that
he was going to grow up to be a writer and write stories about pirates. So he at
least had the idea from the time he was nine years old. Certainly he was not
thinking about money then.
I needed that. Well, that's all you wanted to do? Yeah. I got one.
When did Howard first start writing and get published? I believe his first
publication that I know of was in the Brownwood High School newspaper. And some
of those are running around town here somewhere, but I've never made eyes on
them. I understand they had some of them on display at the 50-year reunion that
would have been in 1973. What about his first national publications and Weird
Tales? It was in Weird Tales. that was the first, Tevis Clyde Smith, he was
going to Howard Payne at the time in business school, and he was living in a
house that's over by the underpass, just about a block or two from where we are
right now. And he got the acceptance, and Tevis Clyde Smith said, no, I believe
it was Lindsay Tyson who told me this, that he opened the letter, it was an
acceptance, and he had received many rejections from other magazines before. He
said he fell down on his knees and thanked God that he had made this sale.
Jumped up and said, now it won't be so hard. Now that I've finally broken in,
I'll have a better chance at selling some of the others. Is it true that when he
lived in Cross Plains, you know, the last, what, what, ten years? How long was
he in Cross Plains? He lived in Cross Plains in his junior high. Oh, okay, that
long. Okay. When he was earning his money as a writer, say at the year or two
before his death, was he making, I read a state, more money than anybody in
cross-plains? That's what Jack Scott says. You think that's true? For
depression, now this is depression days, of course. The story in Brownwood is
that he was the only man, either in Brown County or maybe just in cross-plains,
who could afford to buy a new car and pay cash for it. And he was the only one
who paid income tax one year. It was only one in cross-claims who had to pay
income tax. And when he died, he did have a car that was only one year old. It
was a Chevrolet that was a year old, maybe not even quite a year, and he had
paid cash for it. And he did leave some money in the bank, and he had a paid-up
insurance policy made out to his mother. She survived it by 11 days, so his
father had to go through this legal rigmarole, since his wife didn't leave a
will, so that he could collect this insurance policy. Was he helping to support
his mother? Was there any kind of? Oh, I feel certain that he did. At least he
said so in his letters. Now, again, maybe he wanted to feel that he was
necessary to his parents. Maybe his father was making enough money, but he
mentioned in his letters that the cost of medicine was so expensive and the
things that they needed was very expensive. I'm kind of interested also in
Howard's consciousness of himself as a writer. And did he think that he, in your
opinions of course, do you think that he thought of himself as a writer who
would be remembered as anything more than a person simply making a living as an
author? Didn't he have a consciousness of himself as possibly being remembered
as a regional writer of the Southwest for some of his Western material?
I mean, just his own attitude about himself as a creator, as an author who would
be remembered. Do you have any ideas about that? As far as I know, the only
thing that I've even heard would be about the regional, the southwestern
material, some of the Western stories. I don't know that he ever thought that
these other stories were that literary or maybe even that important. You know,
he cannibalized some stories that he would write set in one time frame. He would
go back and rewrite them using other characters. Not that that would make any
difference, I don't give. But I think he did have a desire to be remembered. He
wanted to be a great artist, and I think that's why he decided to do an epic of
the southwest. That's what he told Lovecraft he wanted to do. He wanted to do an
epic Texas and the Southwest and he wrote this long genealogical thing saying he
had a feel for it, because his people had been here and his grandfathers had
been in the Confederacy and all this that and the other, of what he had this
strong feeling for it. But I think he was looking for something. As you said, he
knew that the stories he was writing at the time probably would not be
remembered immortally. He would be quite surprised, I think, to find out in
Conan's popularity today. But he had a desire to be remembered. And he was
looking for a medium in which he would excel. I think it was Lovecraft, for
sure. But I think some others, too, who said that had he lived and had he
continued to write, that he would have written more regional, more Western
stories, perhaps the epic of the Southwest. That's what De Camp thinks. Yeah,
and he would be. Oh, De Camp thinks the same thing, that he would be remembered
for that. But did he do any work in that direction beyond his, let's see, his
Breckenridge, let's see, Pike Bear Field? He jumped from Bear Creek. Yeah, okay.
Beyond the work that he had published in the field of the West, are there any
notes that you know of or any kind of attempt to start an epic of the region?
Not to start the epic, no. There were some fragments of other Western tales
found in those two troves and manuscripts that Glen Lardin & Camp dug up.
Dr. Kreider, we may have to cut this. I'm not sure I'm going the right direction
here. Don't worry about it. Have you read any of his Western work? Only a few
stories. Yeah. I've heard De Camp read one that he thinks very highly of. I've
forgotten. About shooting off the ear. Right. Well, what I want to ask about
that, and I've read most of his Western work myself. people have said he had a
feeling for the idiom of the West the regionalisms, the atmosphere and so forth
but it was still, what I've read is still the pulp of what, the pulp environment
the pulp formulas for the stories do you think he, did he have his roots deeply
enough or a feeling for the West deeply enough where he could have written a
realistic kind of Western material. You mean, could he have become the Louis L
'Amour? No, no, I mean more seriously. I mean, a good book, great literature. I
mean, did he have the talent, or was he so, you know, imbued with the pulp
environment that... He may have had the talent, but I certainly don't believe he
was capable of writing realistic fiction. He was not that closely tied to
reality himself. I don't believe he ever could have written realistic novels. He
had to write fantasies of some sort. He may have had the talent, but I don't
think he had the personal realism to do it. His Western material, most of it
that I've read, is humorous. Probably, Ryan. I think that's what De Camp admires,
is the humorous aspect of it. And he seems to think that that might have been
the direction he was going, more to the humorous Western than the realistic
Western. Of course, we have to say a little bit of De Camp in that conclusion
because De Camp writes humorous science fiction, and you tend to think, well, he
would have become more like me. And in fact, it's De Camp's lightheartedness that
some people can't forgive him for. They accuse him of making Conan into a
puckish character, which was not really in Howard's original writing. Conan
certainly wasn't very puckish. He wasn't very funny in any way. Well, at the
risk of outraging all the Howard fans, And Charlotte keeps saying maybe he had
the talent, but where is that really in evidence in the stories that we have? If
Robert E. Howard is a great writer, or a great stylist, I'm not sure that there
is any evidence of that. I think he was a fine pulp writer and I don't have
anything bad to say about his pulp work, But I don't know that he would ever
have broken out of that pulp ghetto and be accepted by what we might call the
approved literature standards. Since he was writing for money towards the end,
he definitely was, it would be very hard to break out of the pulp syndrome that
he was in, because he was having to write what people wanted to read. Now, I
think parts of Conan are fairly literary. But then you'll get to a fairly good
point, and then he'll have another one of those wrestling matches with a giant
snake, you know, the same formulas that he's used in a dozen other places, and
they get very old and very trite. But there are, you know, a paragraph or two at
a time where it sounds as though he really did have a command of the language
that I like. I like the sound of it. And also, though, he was interested in
history and studied it. Aren't there a lot of anachronisms? Go ahead and back
that up. He was interested in history. Although he was interested in history and
studied it and had a lot of books in his collection, didn't de Camp find a number
of anachronisms in some of the Conan manuscripts and even changed one or two of
them in some of those pastiches that he did. Yes, I believe one was the stirrups
that he mentioned. He had him in stirrups before there were stirrups. But since
this is a completely imaginary world in the Hyborian age, how do we know they
didn't have stirrups? yeah but I wonder whether he would have been no
okay you needed to lead in on something I'm gonna change the subject okay we
were talking about well that would fit right in doing research blah blah blah he
she just mentioned that he wore stirrups and that was out of context. And you
were just saying. I was just saying that I don't know if he had ever written
westerns other than the humerus kind, whether he would have had the stamina or
whatever is required to do accurate historical research. And it might be that he
would just have relied on old family stories and things like that. A lot of the
books that I noticed in the Library here at Howard Payne were the Lowell Thomas
history series, which is somewhat colorful and not exactly accurate.
And Dr. Loughlin has the list of his books that we have and we can confirm that
he did have I'm sure some more solid kinds of historical research but I don't
think that's what his personal taste was inclined to. I think he would have
relied not even so much on family stories as he would have on his own reading.
And he read things like Robert Service novels. He had let's see 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
of those. Sorry, I was counting. Okay, wait, wait, okay, mic up and talk about
the Robert Service. He had— I was saying that I thought that Robert Howard not
only would have relied upon family stories, but even more so he would have
relied upon his own reading of fiction. And his taste in fiction doesn't seem to
be too high. He read things like the Robert Service novels. We know that there
were six Robert Service books in his personal library that his father donated to
Howard Payne. What were the Robert Service novels? Well, he wrote several
different kinds. He wrote Robert Service poetry. Robert Service wrote poetry,
but it was, how would you describe it, Bill? I haven't read them. Well, I read
this kind of thing when I was growing up. They're very melodramatic. His war
stories were very melodramatic, and you have this lone hero and he's so noble
and so good. But I would not say that Robert Soros' writing is really realistic.
He had a lot of Sachs Romer books in his collection also. The oriental, exotic,
romantic type of thing. I just can't picture Howard as a realistic writer in any
way. Well, he had to get almost all of his, what do you want to call it,
inspiration for his fiction from his reading because it's sort of a... Another
of De Camp's points is that that's a weakness in Howard's work is that he never
traveled to see these things. He never really got out of Cross Plains. He did a
little, but not much. In fact, some of the incidents in his novels you can find
in other novels that he had read, and I'm sorry I can't remember the specific
examples. We do know that, I believe it was Cimarron by Edna Ferber, he told
Lovecraft, he wrote Lovecraft, that this incident had really happened in Cross
Plains. And it was an incident in Cimarron.
Well, Howard relied heavily on the reading that he did. Is that okay? He relied
so heavily on it that in his letters he actually... No, wait a minute. Go ahead
and start again. I have to have room to edit the clicks and stuff out. Howard
relied heavily on the reading that he did. He relied on it for his fiction.
Also, he claimed that some of the incidents actually happened in his own life.
He wrote Lovecraft that an incident in which something was blown up in an oil
field. I can't remember exactly what it was in that you had to be in great
physical shape because this man was able to catch it in his arms and run with it
to save the lives of all of these people. But the incident did not happen in
Cross Plains. It happened in the novel Cimarron, which was in his personal
library, which was done in Tyler Payne. So he had such a slight grasp of reality
or such slight experience in the world that he actually had to claim things from
novels to have been in his experience to have things to write about to people.
Who are some of the other authors that he would have had in his library that he
liked to read? You know, creators of fiction. He had about six Conan Doyle
books. I was wondering how much influence the Conan series and Brian McMorrin
and all the Barbarian-type series had from Edgar Rice Burroughs books that I
noticed he had a few of those. Well, I'm really not qualified to tell you that.
He had one that I say, The Beasts of Tarzan. Well Tarzan and Conan are similar
enough. Outcasts. I mean they don't actually fit in with the front of the mill
type of person, which is what Howard wanted to be. Away from civilization, super
men sort of. Mm-hm. Isn't it sort of strange, this is sort of a summation, I
think, of what we've been saying, to have a writer of fantasy particularly the
kind that Howard wrote, which I associate mostly with the northern environment,
I suppose, coming from the southwest, from such an arid landscape, from such a
small town. you know was so little traveling in his life he would have had to
have gotten everything from his imagination from books because he had not
experienced any of that to me that's always been sort of a paradox I think his
interest in the Celtic heritage wasn't that one of his big things a belief in
his famous or royal ancestors which may or may not have existed. Let Dr.
Hoffman tell you. He claimed that he was full blood Irish and they were the Irish
kings like some other people claim to be. But there is no evidence that he
certainly was not full blood Irish, people have traced his genealogy. This was
part of his image of himself. He was trying to project other people and trying
to create for himself. There again, he wrote at one time that he wrote about the
barren, cold, windswept, damp areas even though he had isolated. he lived here,
I think that again might be a sort of wish fulfillment. Who wouldn't like to be
someplace where it's cold on a day like this? He wanted to be away from where he
was because I don't think we can underestimate the anger and frustration that
was boiling around in Robert Howard all the time. I see it in all of his poetry
and a great deal of his fiction.
Cross Plains' neighbors say that there was a big tree stump out by his yard, and
I believe it was a sledgehammer, not an ax, and sometimes in the middle of the
day he would go out there, you know, and you could just see that he was so
tense, and he would take that sledgehammer, and he would just wham it and wham
it and wham it on this tree stump that a tremendous amount of anger, he didn't
fit in with other people, he wanted to be somewhere else, so he wrote about
something that was like nothing he had experienced. It's hard not to
psychoanalyze a guy like that, right, and see the barbarian chopping the heads
off and see him out there whamming the trees to open. You really can't. In other
words, too, you think that perhaps his theory of the, what, the ancient heroes
of the past sort of reliving or their force, their power, whatever you want to
call it, their heroic action sort of living in modern men. He sort of saw
himself as an ancestor or a, what, a remnant of that kind of ancient hero? A
descendant, the last one left, the one who didn't... The last celt. Yes, he saw
himself as the last celt just about. Well, he wouldn't go so far as to believe
in reincarnation, would he? Sometimes it almost sounds like it. But I really
doubt that he actually believed it. I remember, I forget, I think the
character's name was James Allison, Valley of the Wyrm, I think, in one of his
works. he is I think he's on the point of dying as James Allison character is
and he's like Howard he's a remnant he's a powerful individual a great hero he
doesn't fit you know but he's in the modern world and he recalls the heroes the
dragon slayers the worm slayers from the past all the way back to an original I
think who was called Njord who killed a huge worm like creature you know back in
prehistory And Allison remembers all the incarnations that this hero's force had
passed through to get to James Allison. Which makes you wonder how much H. Ryder
Haggard was in his library. Was there any? That sounds a lot like H. Ryder
Haggard's heroes.
words. that Howard said he believed because he was constantly trying to create
an image of himself and project that to other people. So I don't think we can
say he did believe in reincarnation or he didn't. If he said outright that he
did, it doesn't mean that he did.
He was interested too in all kinds of sports, wasn't he? Boxing, football, manly
sports. Did not like football. Didn't like any kind of team sports. He liked
boxing. He liked the idea of fencing. The sports he was interested in were
the—well, he did go to football games some, but from his experience with the
basketball team when he was a young boy, he was not good at team sports. He
couldn't cooperate with other people, and he saw the truly admirable sports to
be the one-on-one. He's been a good hockey player where he whacked people over
the head. Was he a good boxer? Do you know? I mean, you said he took care of
himself. He was very interested in physical fitness. And isn't there a picture
of him in the last celst striking the holes with the fists up? But I don't know
of any actual fights that he ever got into. No, I don't believe so. To answer
your other question, he had three H. Writer Haggard books in his library. Alan
Quatermain, is that the title? Yeah. Ancient Alan and People of the Mist. That
doesn't surprise me. Dr. Laughlin, can you tell us something about the discovery
of the Howard Manuscripts and the controversies and the problems that have come
up in that area? Yes, a little bit of it. L. Sprague de Camp really didn't get
interested in Howard until the... And in ten minutes
it's going to do it again. Ten minutes? So talk for ten minutes. Just start it
right here for you. Yes, L. Sprague de Camp didn't get interested in Howard
until about 1950 when he first read Conan the Conqueror and perhaps it was 1949
but it's around that time. Then I don't know how you say it Bjorn Nyberg wrote
him that he had written a Conan-type book to practice his English and ask Mr.
De Camp to redo it and I believe Mr. De Camp was trying to sell this story to
Donald Wollheim or for some reason he was discussing it with Donald Wollheim And,
Wollheim said, well, I understand that Oscar J. Friend has a whole box of
unpublished Howard manuscripts, which you'd be interested in those. And, Mr.
Deccant just came unglued. Yes, I'm interested. The very next day, he went
rushing over to Oscar Friend's and asked for the box. I don't know if he had to
pay for them. Oscar J. Friend was a literary agent associated with Otis Klein
literary agency that Robert Howard used. And, he still had this box of things.
that was in November of 1950, so actually Mr. De Camp was the one who found the
first hoard of manuscripts, and then a little later it was either Friends or
Klein's daughter inherited that literary agency, and she did not want to handle
a higher manuscript. She didn't like the stuff and so she told the De Camp, said,
have to find someone else and Mrs. De Camp wanted to be the literary executor,
but Mr. De Camp didn't think this would be fair. Because they had the manuscripts
didn't mean they had the copyright. The copyright was still owned by the
Kirkendalls because Dr. Howard had left the Kirkendalls everything which
included the rights to his son as a copyright. So they were having to deal with
the Kirkendalls and Mr. De Camp thought it might be fair for his own wife to be a
literary executor. So he called Glenlord. He had never met him I don't believe
they responded he was just a very active fan. He asked Glen Lord to do it, which
he agreed to do and he took his job very seriously. He traced down a second box
of unpublished manuscripts in California. When Robert died, his father seemed to
find it painful to have things of Robert's around the house. He gave them away.
He gave away baby pictures, very nice studio portrait, baby pictures. He gave
away all of his manuscripts. And he gave one box, I believe it was Clark Ashton
Smith. It was someone in California—a writer with whom, Howard had cordial
correspondence. And he felt very grateful to the people who had had cordial
relations with Robert, because he had so few friends. So his father gave all of
them presents, mementos of Robert. And whoever this writer was, it may have been
Smith, loaned the box, the manuscript, to a fan and the fan never returned him.
He couldn't get them back. Then in the meantime, Clark Ashton Smith, whatever
the writer was and the fan both die. The box of manuscripts is in some of the
things that the family goes through, and I don't know what they are, or what to
do with them, so they're just stuffed off somewhere in a box. They're gotten
about. Then Lord managed to trace that down, sort of a little detective hunt,
but he had to go on to find them. And he didn't find that in 1965. And he had to
buy them from, you know, buy the physical manuscripts. He didn't have to buy the
copyright. But he had to buy them from whoever had them at the time. And that
was for an undisclosed sum. I understand it was sizable in 1965. Do you think we
have all the Howard manuscripts today, or might there still be some around?
There's always rumors that there are some around. When Dr. Howard gave the
library to Howard Payne, there were rumors that he also gave the manuscripts. We
do know that he gave copies of the pulp magazines that Howard had been published
in. And at some time, Dr. Howard came and retrieved the magazines. He told his
friends that the students were reading them to pieces and that's why he came to
get them. The story around Howard Payne is that the librarian thought that the
ladies on the covers of Weird Tales in the pulp magazines were not quite what
belonged to a Baptist university. So, she hid them in the basement of Old Main,
which is the building. And, it got rather damp down there, and they were
ruining. So, that's why the father got them. The story, there's a story that T.
R. Havens, who was a historian here, and a librarian, another librarian, well,
she was not a librarian, she was a secretary or something, Lena Vinson, Truett
Vinson's sister. Truett Vinson was a close friend of Howard, who he lives in
Austin now. That Lena Vinson and T. R. Havens realized that this librarian was
going to throw out a bunch of this junk that she thought was unchristian so they
put it in the back seat of their car and someone said the whole back seat was
full and it included manuscripts and people have even it may have been someone
actually saw one of the manuscripts in Dr. Haven's desk here about 15 years ago
that he had a typescript that he pulled out and showed but Dr. Haven's is now
dead his widow is now dead if there was anything there we'll probably never hear
from it. I think also an extension of that kind of confusion is what happens
today if you walk into a bookstore and go to the fantasy section you'll find at,
what, at least three publishing houses publishing the Howard material. I think
it's Berkley and Bantam and Ace I believe it is. Or is Lancer a fourth one or
are they? Lancer has gone out of business. Now that's an interesting story too.
That's part of the controversy of the publication of what happened. And part of
the zebra business is also Zebra was publishing. Because
Zacharias, or whatever his name is, was associated with both of them. The lancer
books were authorized. They were paid a certain amount for them, nothing
exorbitant. When Lancer went out of business, I believe it was Mr. Zacharias
took some of the things to zebra books. Then Lancer sold to someone who was
buying up bankrupt companies. and they were claiming a law under which a company
that does not go bankrupt but reorganizes does not lose the copyrights. In the
contracts they had, they had a bankruptcy cause and if the publisher went
bankrupt, they got back the copyrights, but they were in court for years on
that. And in the meantime, Glen Lord and some others sold the rights to Berkley
or what Mr. De Camp thought was a pittance.
But sure enough, they lost the suit. And Lancer was allowed to claim.
You should have taken out the hook.
Glen Lord and some of the Conan group felt certain that they would win the lawsuit with Lancer.
So they went ahead and sold the rights to the Conan material to Berkley Books.
And Berkeley started producing the books, publishing them.
But in the meantime, they lost the lawsuit. Lancer won. They were allowed to
claim it was a reorganization, not a bankruptcy, so the copyrights did not
return, or the publishing rights. The reorganizer, a person who had actually
bought Lancer out, had sold the rights to Ace Books, and Ace had already
produced them all, that 12 numerical series of Conan Books. They were all ready
to go, and when this decision was reached in, I think, March of 77, they they
rushed them to the market immediately, and the rioters and the Conan people
didn't get any money and they actually called it a kind of piracy, but they
settled that out of court. They did engage a lawyer, Arthur Lieberman, who had
them organize what he called Conan properties, which has made Conan a registered
trademark so that not anybody can use it. And I don't know exactly who all the
members of Conan properties are, but it includes De Camp and Glen Lord and
Arthur Lieberman the lawyer. and I want to say Kirby McCauley who was the
literary agent and there are two others. I believe there are six people who are
members of that. Is there an authorized publisher at the present time? Bantam is
doing the new pastiches and so far as I know Ace is doing all of the older
things but I don't know about an authorized publisher. Is this by agreement
among themselves? I was like, Bantam, Bantam does the pastiches, you say? Just
the pastiches, Dr. Crater, is that correct? Well, not entirely, because they've
done the Solomon Kane books and some of the others. But I know that recently Ace
has been issuing the Conan originals by Howard, that is, the reprints of the
Conan series, are being done by Ace, apparently. I don't believe anything is
done by agreement among themselves. There's tremendous lawsuits that go on over
the whole thing. I'm certain Conan Properties had to settle with Ace about what
they could do. Now, the writers of the pastiches can deal with the publisher
directly, but a portion of anything they do that is a Conan pastiche has to be
paid into Conan Properties. And Glenn Lord, his literary agent, gets 5% off the
top of that. Now, he was not always literary agent. Kirby McCauley was. But
Menlo, I believe, now is the one who gets the phone for sale. In other words, a
publishing house can contract with any author to do a Conan book, as long as
it's a pastiche and a certain percentage is given to the estate. Well, the Conan
properties has to agree to let you use that name. And they don't agree to let
just anybody use it. And if they agree to let you use the name, a certain
percentage of your profits has to be paid to them. how many authors are doing
past issues or have done I don't know of Andy Offutt, Poul Anderson, L. Sprague
De Camp, Lin Carter. De Camp and Carter in collaboration. Bjorn Nyberg. Nyberg and
De Camp in collaboration. Who have we left out?
now as we said Carl Edward Wagner was planning to do one He did one, didn't he?
He did one, and planning to do a second, that one never appeared, but I believe
he did do one. So there'll be another one. He did one in the Bantam series of
six. What about those kinds that you just mentioned?